[MUSIC]
>> Speaker 1: Let's talk about some
useful usages of functions and scopes.
Remember we talked about
function expressions,
that's where the function keyword
is not in a declaration position.
So here you see, I did my bad practice
of doing an anonymous function.
But on line three, I have a function
expression, from line three to a.
And then I've done this weird thing
of wrapping it in parentheses.
We'll explain that in a moment.
But why am I doing that?
Well the reason, the reasoning behind
it that's obvious from this code is,
I've got a piece of code
like lines five and
six that I want to wrap,
I want to hide in a new scope.
And we know, that JavaScript, the unit
of scope that we get, is the function.
So all we need to do is create
a new function somewhere and
we'll get a new block
of scope to wrap it in.
In other languages, you could just
put a new curly brace pair somewhere.
But we don't have that quite
the same in JavaScript, so
the way we do that is to
put a function somewhere.
Well now I could have done, on line three,
I could have said, function bob and
made a name function declaration,
and then on line eight I could
have executed that function by saying bob,
open, close, parentheses.
That would have worked, but
the problem with that is that I
would have leaked out a name.
The name bob would have leaked
out into the enclosing scope.
That defeats the purpose of
what I'm attempting to do.
I'm attempting to hide some stuff
not to pollute my existing scope.
So the way we can do this is
what's called the iffy pattern.
We can make this function expression,
the one that starts on line three and
then goes to here.
We wrap it in parentheses
to make it an expression.
Remember if that
parentheses was not there,
would the function keyword be
an expression or a declaration?
Be a declaration.
That's not what we want.
We want an expression, so one of the
syntactic ways we make an expression is to
just not make it the first word,
first thing in the statement,
by wrapping it in some parentheses.
Now we need to execute that function
right away, so we put another
set of parentheses on the end of it and
that immediately executes our expression.
Anybody in here have any experience
with the Lisp programming language,
or Lisp-like languages?
This might look a little familiar.
We're basically sticking a function
on a stack and then executing it.
That's kind of JavaScript betraying
a little bit of its scheme Lisp roots.
We stick a function inside of this
parenthesis and then we execute it.
So it can be anonymous or it could have
been a named function expression, it would
have been better if I'd have called
it function IIFE, given it a name so
that I don't have the same problems
that I have with anonymous functions.
But in any case when I say var foo
it's now going to attach it to that
local function scope,
rather than polluting this outer scope.
So inside of here on
line six the foo is foo2,
but on line ten the foo is still just foo.
Is everybody following that?
Reminder, these little icons down on the
bottom left are your clue that you should
click on it and try it yourself,
not just trust me.
This pattern is extremely popular,
I'd call this maybe in the top two most
popular patterns in all of JavaScript.
For a long time we had it, but
we didn't have a name for it.
Back in 2009, 2010, something like that,
this really super smart dude named
Ben Allman, he goes by Cowboy online.
He's created more J query plugins
himself than I think the rest of
the J query community combined.
This guy is extremely prolific,
super smart, he's a trainer for
Boku out in Boston.
Really smart guy.
But he said, you know what,
we need a name for this pattern.
So he wrote a blog post kind of
suggesting that we give it a name and
the name that he suggested was
immediately invoked function expression.
Well it's a function expression
that gets immediately invoked.
So it's an awfully good name for it and we
shorten that to IIFE and that's now become
sort of the defacto standard name for
this pattern, is the IIFE pattern.
It does not have to be
stand alone like this.
These things can exist as part of
assignments, as part is passing.
But the key hallmark of an IIFE is
that you have a function expression,
either named or anonymous,
that immediately invokes itself, and
that's that open, close,
parentheses on the end.
So the IIFE pattern is really popular,
I'd recommend go reading his blog
post about it but
that's what everyone calls it.
This is extremely important because many
of us have in our own code right now,
we have a big file with a whole bunch
of code strewn all about the code, and
the problem with that is that this stuff
is strewn all over the place and we don't
have any way to kind of protect stuff
from being in the global name space and
collisions and all that.
The most common solution to that is to
put an IIFE statement at the top to start
an IIFE, and put a closing IIFE like line
eight at the bottom of your file and now
automatically everything in that file is
hidden inside [COUGH] of the IIFE scope.
So let's say you've got
100 functions there and
only one of those functions is
actually necessary to be global.
We go and wrap an IIFE around it and
now all 100 of them are private,
and then you take one of those and
you add it as a property to the window
object or whatever to make it global.
But you hide 99 of them from being
public that didn't need to be public.
So as a little piece of homework,
if you've got any spaghetti code where you
got a whole bunch of stuff in the global,
go home and wrap an IIFE around it and
make your code better.
Will, was there a question?
>> Speaker 2: Yes,
there was a question in chat.
How would the IIFE pattern sound
in our anthropomorphic
compiler style conversation?
>> Speaker 1: That's a great question.
So it's not a declared function.
Obviously it was a function
expression that got compiled, but
it's not a declared function.
So basically what the compiler would say,
I mean not the compiler but
the runtime would say, is,
I have a function expression,
it's an immediate value, kind of like the
immediate quote foo is an immediate value.
It's an immediate value, so
we reference that immediate
value inside of our parentheses.
As opposed to having a reference
identifier that we needed to do a scope
lookup of, this is an immediate value,
just like 42 or quote foo.
We have the immediate value and
then we can immediately
execute it with line eight.
So it's more akin to those immediate
values on the right hand side than it is
to some sort of lexical identifier.
>> Speaker 3: So it cuts out the run time.
>> Speaker 1: What's that?
>> Speaker 3: [INAUDIBLE]
>> Speaker 1: That's at run time,
it was compiled ahead of time, obviously,
it has to be compiled ahead of time.
From a run time perspective,
it's not gonna get executed
until it gets to line three.
>> Speaker 1: Okay?
Great question.
>> Speaker 4: Would you
recommend naming the IIFE?
>> Speaker 1: I do
recommend naming the IIFE.
>> Speaker 4: Like if you have-
>> Speaker 1: [CROSSTALK]
Very non-idiomatic, but
I recommend always naming your IIFEs.
Just name it IIFE.
But, in your stack traces you don't want
to have anonymous functions anywhere,
so give your IIFEs names as well.
Okay.
Now what are some variations on the IIFE
pattern that are really useful?
The first is that an IIFE
is just a function call,
which means we can pass things into it.
This is the call site of our function.
We can pass values and variables into it,
and we can name those parameters and
they don't have to be the same thing.
So I say foo bar here just
to be kind of generic, but
the most common way that this is done,
what I do in my code,
is I pass in the window object,
but I call it global.
Now why do I do that?
Inside of my IIFE I've got a hundred
functions that are private,
and I've got two or three functions
that I need to make global.
So inside of my function I've got 97 of
them just a regular function declarations,
and variables, and all kinds of, and
those are all automatically private,
it's obvious they're private.
But anywhere where I say global
dot in front of something,
it's obvious to me that
I'm creating a global.
So as a stylistic choice,
rather than the window,
which is a little less obvious, I give an
alias, if you will, to my window object.
I call it global.
And that's really obvious in my code,
which things are global and not.
That's one way of using it.
That's what I like to do.
Another extremely common example
of this in the jQuery world
is you're worried about making sure that
the dollar sign really does legitimately
point to the jQuery object,
cuz there can be other frameworks
that sort of can collide with that.
So what you do there on line eight instead
of passing in that foo you pass in
the named jQuery,
the j capital Q, jQuery object.
But you'd call it, on line three,
you'd call it dollar sign.
That way you know inside of your IIFE
you're guaranteed that the dollar sign
points to the jQuery that
you wanted it to point to.
And many people will do
a mixture of both of those.
They'll make the window and
the jQuery pass through multiple ones,
but the IIFE pattern gives us a way to
manually pass in an alias variable
from the enclosing scope.
Questions about IIFE?
>> Speaker 5: I've seen
the pass undefined.
>> Speaker 1: [COUGH]
>> Speaker 5: As a second
argument-
>> Speaker 1: Yeah.
>> Speaker 5: Is that for
security or what?
>> Speaker 1: I don't
actually like this practice.
There's some people that were concerned
about the fact that in non-strict mode,
the undefined keyword was
a writeable property.
They were concerned that somebody may,
on purpose or on accident,
say, undefined equals true.
And then anywhere in your code where
you were referencing the undefined,
you'd get something you didn't expect.
So the way they solve that, and the same
way with the jQuery, they don't pass
anything for the second parameter, but
the named parameter on line three, they
call it undefined, so they make sure that
the undefined really is in fact undefined.
I think that's overkill.
I don't think it's a really good pattern
to recommend and it's fixed as a strict
mode so it's not an issue anymore,
but there are people that do that.